20th
This is my notes folder.  I don't want to have too many comments inside of my actual code.  I'm writing this to explain all my thinking into this project.
It's worth mentioning none of this is generated or created with AI.  There are more than enough online resources for me to learn how to both build this implementation and use C++
correctly as a whole.

My goal is to make sure I clearly  show my thinking here.  Comments will contain an explanation on what's going on.

I've chosen to do a suffix tree.  My initial plan was a suffix array with LCP array, however I really wanted to challenge myself here.

The plan is to use Ukkonen's algorithm for the suffix tree construction.  We will see how this all goes.

Additionally, I've initialised a simple CMakeList for when tests need to be run.  There is no actual entry to the code outside of the tests.

20th
I think the best way to describe this is I'm going for a very test-driven approach:
	1. I will build the actual framework of the suffix tree first.  Any classes, methods, etc -- all without implementation themselves.
	2. Then I will write test cases for every possible aspect of the implementation from construction, searching, etc
	3. Once the test cases are written, they should all fail.
	4. Write the implementation to slowly pass each test case
	5. Everything should be working from there

With a complete implementation, I will go on to do the correctness commentary.

20th
I've read up on the initial Ukkonen papers On-line construction of suffix trees.
I'm quite confident in building this implementation.  I've only read the logic and some pseudocode -- I'm not looking for code to directly reference or copy as that would make this
whole exercise almost pointless.

The goal here is challenge myself and see if I can build the implementation only understanding the theory and logic behind it.

So how can I kick things off?  I have my simply project setup, and I'll store everything in the src folder.

The way I want to design the suffix tree is:
	- We have some suffix tree class
	- The constructor takes any string including empty string
	- Then it build the suffix tree and returns

I don't suspect a generalised suffix tree will be important here, although I might implement it anyway for some fun.

Another possible design thought I've got is that what if instead of a suffix tree class, it's a suffix node such that each node instead contains the typical parent and child
pointer


24th

THere is some complication in that if I implement the algorithm, whether or not I should contain both edges and vertices as objects.

My initial thoughts are no, and that vertices are linked as fields using a pointer, and they contain the value inside.

Then we just have some boolean which says IsTerminal

24th
I've just created a simple header file
My thought process is first just contain a function which returns the root node of a tree. This is because there is no need for a tree object itself, at least not yet.

The thing I got  wrong about our point struct is that it's supposed to exist in the scope of a function not a node.  It's shared.

I'm very certain and confident that there is absolutely no reason to have an edge object. A node can only have on in-going edge -- suffix-links are a different consideration.

For now I will keep the suffix data in the node as a string.

When it comes to the active point, edge is just a char.  If we have a string [a,b] of length k, it Ukkonen's implicitly means there are k - 1 edges which actually exist.
And so it's fair to say that a singular char is actually an edge.  If we wish to keep track of where we are on implicit edges, the length exists.
It is technically fair to say that we could just use a single variable to index and track length, however a char field is only 1 byte.

24th
Simple Create function exists in the main implementation file.  No real processing is done yet, now tests can be created.

Honestly, give it's most likely one publicly exposed function, I don't even need to use a testing library.  I can simply do it all myself.

I believe this is simply the easiest way to do it.  GTest is heavy and whilst Cactch2 is a good alternative, I don't need any mocking tools

To do this, I'll just have a file called TestRunner which contains running of tests, and then a simple file containing all test cases.

The biggest issue regarding test cases is the fact that the tree must exist for a direct comparison.  For these tests to be valid
they must absolutely test all aspects of the newly generated tree.

This can be primarily done with node values themselves, and child node count.  I won't enforce things like suffix trees because these aren't necessarily testable, at least not yet.
I believe the following is the best for each test
	- Provide a name --> Simple string
	- Provides input value -> Any single word
	- Provides expected values -> A 2d vector where vec[i] contains an array of expected children at index i from a BFS. 
					| vec[i][j] will eventually be processed in order
					| vec[i][j] itself will be a Suffix_Node which contains the expected suffix at that point as well.
	
In terms of running the test, if any error is thrown or it returns False, then the test fails. 
The runner will also check for terminal vectors at the end as well.

How the tests are run will simply be one file which contains my test, and another file which contains a function to run the test and output results.

24th
I need to fix the cmakelist to make the actual build runnable.  I'm just reading some quick documentation to understand how linking libraries works before I actually do it.

25th
creating a test framework is taking away from the main focus I'll just use doctest it's way easier.

After doing some research into cmake documentation, there were many issues with how I was building and linking simple libraries.  Instead I'm just going to manually use target
sources because it's quicker.

According to documentation I dont need to link libraries if they are at the same target.  Then I just include subdirectories so the build has a path to the files.

Now the only issue is that I have actual build errors which I can easily fix.  From here, it's then do test cases and implement the algorithm until all pass.
One major problem I have notices is that I'm building as though it's a simple main entry point.  It's not, we are only running tests so there should either be a main to do that
or cmake should call the tests directly.

I keep getting a very strange linking error where main isn't found -- that's the exact purpose of the macro though.

Anyway, I will be instead doing something else, I'll just define the main myself and run against the doctest context -- it's provided in the configuration markdown in the repo

25th

Now that I can finally write my test cases I'll do them as above stated way above

There should only need to be around 10 test cases. Testing a range of empty string, to simple strings to repeated characters in different patterns is the goal

Writing in doctest is relatively simple and easy.  I've been making a few mistakes getting used to it but im looking for an Nunit strucutre.  Asserting result isnt nullptr is key
every time.

Firstly I want to rename things to make it a bit easier, Suffix_Tree::Suffix_Node is bad naming, should drop the suffix.

The other things is that the root node is basically a default value, and it's expected every test case, so I'll just create a simple helper function to create one.
These would look like
Node { {0,0}, {}} -> Empty indices and no children./

----
Given that a lot of these test cases are incredibly  repeitive but partiall complex, what is the feasibility of possible doing an externel configuration file?
Could be json for instance

Test_Cases : {
	"Empty string": {
		input : "x",
		expected: {
			"0" --> Node ID instead of address : { 
				Ind : {
					a, b
				},
				Children: {
					a, b, c, etc.
				}
			}
		}
	}
}

See now the advantage here is I can just have simple methods for creating this within the code it becomes easy.  The whole repetitive setup done and I have dynamic
test case creation.

I'm not entirely sure how cmake deals with test cases, however I'm thinking that the build wont be ruin without the source code in this example.  So I'll keep the json file
in tests and have some concrete reference from project root.

The even better part is doctest should be completely compatible with some form of dynamic test cases.  All though I have a very big hunch here that a custom test case library
would be even easier, I think that's the route that I'll go.

-----
It's worth mentioning c++ isn't like many other algorithms with out of the box json support, however nlohmann/json is a header-only library which works fine.

Now that everything all builds correctly, just time to implement some simple json running logic.  

Here's how it'll go, we sore an array of all test cases from the json then:
	1. Loop over each one
	2. Print the name
	3. Run the create function
	4. Create a tree compare function with the expected value from json
	5. The from the root node perform a BFS --> The expected values are ordered in BFS
	6. Compare their indices and children per node.
	7. ID only exists at the json level, the way we know are equal is we enforce the child suffix as equal to the current one, then enforce their children so on.

I've decided to just add the path to cmake at least to make a macro for the file path

=========================
Given there isn't any memory allocation, I don't really need any custom close down logic, so the first failure should throw an exception on a test case and then continue with
the next.

Now that the test runner is working -- I'll make it look nice later -- I can now do the BFS logic to make sure the tree is as expected.

I was writing some additional test cases but I've found a slight issue with terminals:
	- Instead have some boolean called IsTerminal, we don't need the suffix but can be [len, len]

---
I'm just going to write all the test cases out, I don't think I need to comment too mcuh, it's quite self explanatory the cases
i.e.
- Empty string
- Single Char
- Single char repeated
- Double Char
- Double char repeated
- Example string a
- Example string b

I don't want to be too stubborn.  What I'll do is once I finish writing test cases I will have claude briefly review them --> This is to make sure I'm not infinitely guessing
on incorrect test cases

27th

Noticed a small mistaked ,[a, a] cannot be a terminal node or else the root node is terminal.
This means assume you provide empty string, then you must have the suffixes equal [0, 1] or [a, a +1] which is still valid

Now I've run into an issue, each leaf node must store the index it begins.  So then, how do we even go about this?
that information should've been retrieval by ind, but it might not be given.

The other thought I have is that within each node, we also store a value for index.
We have 2 fields then
Inds -> [a, b] of the incoming edge
then
Ind -> If it's a non-leaf node, then it's null or empty, otherwise it's assigned the beggining index of the suffix.
The issue?  How do you retrieve that?
Well this should be provided once the suffix is added to the root.
For nodes which don't connect to the root there could be slight concern?

I'm going to rename inds to edge for better naming.

The other thing I've though of is just contain ind in every node?  It's impossible for a non-leaf node to have it's ind change, because that's how it works.

----
I've kicked off the test cases with 4 basic ones.  Now I will be generating the rest with claude. I've been very explicit in my own prompts
1. Do not provide implementation or design advice
2. Do not change anything
3. Your goal is to simple generate more test cases according to this structure.

After AI generates this I will then fact check them individually to make sure they are right/.

=====

Now that test cases are implemented then I can simply write the rest of my testing library.  What this will do  is run a BFS on the nodes to validate.

I've completed the BFS assertion, however I'm almost 100% sure there are a few errors.
1. JSON deserialisation does not guarantee we can just call .size()
2. The BFS could be wrong???
3. There should be consistent naming acrros our items, that will be fixed later.

I would like a nicer UI but that isn't important.  I was wondering what the main error was, turns out it had no null pointer checks.

-------

NOW THAT ALL OF THAT IS OUT OF THE WAY WE CAN BEGIN IMPLEMENTATION!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!	
We need to implement the 3 rule of Ukkonen. I'll start simple and just make it so that we add all nodes to the root node.

This will help see if my assertions are correct.

Now i have run into an issue.  We can't simply create a pointer to a node, it will be null.
After reading some internal documentation, it seems that a unique pointer is best here.  
It operates almost like rust ownership as long as:
	- Node is created on the heap
	- Unique pointer points to the node on the heap
	- Returns a unique pointer instead.

I'm not sure exactly if the operations are the same?? such as ->.

Some design changes will be required.

I'm also thinking, what if it's just a non pointer returned?  Inside are pointers to other nodes though, and we definitely don't want those to copy.
What if there just aren't pointers in general?
What if we just store the nodes as part of the array?

Thinking about it, a pointers are pointless here, because a single node can only be a child once.

Now I believe this changes with suffix links, which Is the exact reason why I want to keep pointers.

Now I just realised what I've been mixing up, will my suffix tree have the ability to search?  Will it be an option?  Or is this exclusively a suffix tree construction?

If thats the case I don't even need suffix links.

--=-======
OK I believe I'm exagerating heavy here.  I do not want to focus on searching and suffix tree usage.  I am solely focusing on suffix tree construction with Ukkonen's.
Maybe after I will do it but not now.


back to I want the 3 rules to be implemented.  

Just a few issue regarding test cases.  When claude generated many it based it off when I was using empty string as part.

Now I though, we dont need empty string, and also, no terminal node is needed because empty child field just means exactly that.

This entire time I WAS DOING BFS BASED ON RESULT SIZE.  So the expected werent adding.  I've now separated, 

There is also an issue to do with useing the key as an int instead of string so i can just convert to fix.

====
I keep saying this but the test casing is truly complete.  Very happy with the formatting speed is bad but now I can add and remove test cases with great flexibilityy

TO BEGIN THE ALGORITHM IMPLEMENTATION
I will start with the first rule.

That is that if our character appears on a leaf edge, then we simply extend.

====
IMPLEMENTATION
I've written out the 3 rules as notes, and then Im going to start implementation.

The next thing I shall do is build it out slowly.  

One piece of the design that is crucial is that for all leaf edges, they must point to the current index being processed, so abc automatically becomes abcd for instance.

What my initial though is that -1 means to the end.

so for instance, if edge is [2, -1], this means it's s[2..i] where is i <= size

--=--
spent quite some times going over examples again just to make sure it all works out.  Figured a few things out but primarily that the final terminal character $ is essential in the event
of adding a final suffix of size one when it matches.

I'm replacing Node->Edge to a concrete value not pointer, there is literally no reason for it to be that way.
The difference is obviously in our code that a simply blank or terminal node is just represented as having no children.
No the reason I did it was because it's to do with the root node having no incoming edge.

If c++ could have some nullable instead that would be way better.
Simply copying the value is so much easier than doing a pointer. Because if it's a pointer it has to be a unique pointer, which means we have to do extra.

-=-=
Now I run into some segmentation fault whenever I run my tests.  It is, however, implementation related.

I made a small mistake where I only handle assertion errors no run errors. This is now fixed

^^^ This comment isnt true, because segmentation fault isn't an exception.

Found the segmentation fault --> active root isn't being assigned.

Yep so the other issue was that I mixed the order for ternary operator on a nullptr check.

====
Now Im thinking regarding the node itself, why not just store the children in a hashmap?  It makes the most sense.
If I want to check a suffix exists I do it in O(1) with the unordered set.  But what if I actually want the node in O(1) as well.
Hashmap to a pointer then.

For now Im adding a helper function which will return a $ of any given string if i == word.size();

=== 
There was a problem with conditional checking for the while loop, fixed it and now it's partially running.
None of my output statements are appearing on the error, it's in one of the if statements.

Found it, the active length isnt being initialised.

Now getting a segmentation fault, this is most likely.

The biggest unfixed problems are
1. Remainder isn't looped until 0
2. -1 isn't dealt with

To fix the first, in the 2nd extension rule the loop must occur until remainder equals 0
on each loop
	active node becomes root
	Then the edge is set (its garunteed to already be added)
	decrement length

suffix addition made no sense, it's only added to when skipped and minused from when inserted.

Another issue is that length is being decremented when it's 0. 

==== TEST CASE ISSUE
for empty string it didn't have the $ sign connected.  Checked with claude to only update the test cases so that its a node connected to root.

Regarding b being -1, this can change.  
Here are my thoughts.
b is a pointer to a pointer to int.  By default, everyone is pointing to some pointer end which equals i every time.
Then when the split occurs.  That pointer to pointer becomes the int at that point.

Incredibly memory inefficient though.

If we are going to use a double pointer than I might as well replace i with it too, give it's technical the index we are operating on.

Actually all this can be is some shared pointer to an int.  This means that it's owned by the combined structs, and at most you have one shared pointer per integer.

==== New big problem found.
The order of the nodes isn't preserved because of map.  Whilst this isnt an implementation issue it is a test case issue.

The plan is simply to change the processing so that at each node you compare child size, then loop over expected nodes and insert into hashmap for comparison.

=-===

Tests are fine, splitting logic is not working correctly.

Found the problem, splitting is fine it's how I'm handling remainders.

Remainder logic exists that if its > 0 on extension 1 it continues.

=====
ALL TEST CASES PASS :):):):)
Switching to the newer type of test cases where edges are chars just removes the conversion process.  Im so glad I can move onto the commentary :)

=====
I was wrong

and many things too. The assesrtions were incorrect, and the rules I've written are too.

This is fine, I suspected too which is why I double checked.  I've noticed in my code I got it completely wrong.  Removed the first rule because thats what my shared pointer is for.

I think the best step moving forward is to just refresh the implementation.

Im first going to resetablish what I need and why.

I need to figure out
	1. WHy do I need active point
	2. Where am I going to use it
	3. How do I use it?

One main issue is I was assuming that edge is a nullptr by default, it's not.  That could be part of the segmentation fault.

So what do I know about the 2nd extension?
I know that if the character is new to the node I need to add it
and I know that if it's not new then it splits the edge.

If I remember correctly, each operation should reset back to node, or else it won't be able to detect the correct edge

====
Another issue caught, when I split I dont move the children which will garuntee to cause an error

I get the feeling it would be way better to just have a pointer to the vectors, that way you could easily pass them between.

Found a few errors to do with syuntax, such as pointer for active point.

==== Half test cases passing
This is a very good sign, am very pleased with this progression
